The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is future histories. We need to define what we mean by
future history because almost by definition any science fiction story deals with
the future. And, you know, you could call it a future history simply because
that's where it takes place, but as a descriptive term, you know, as a
particular concept, future history is something else. And I think there are
certain criteria that have to be necessary for a future history story. And I
think one of them would have to be a long time span. I think you have to have an
author who's working over a period of centuries or even millennia for a true
future history. You can't simply have two or three books that occur in a short
period of time. Right. And one obvious thing would be that there would be more
than one story concerning a certain background that an author has contrived.
Well, there would have to be a series. More than one story, obviously, there
would have to be a series, some kind of progression or development or evolution
to the stories. I don't think it's enough that you have stories or novels on one
character. I think you have to have change over a long period of time. And those
changes have to be connected in an evolutionary way, in a progressive way. Yeah.
So stories need to build toward a future which derives itself logically from the
progressions in the stories. Right. Like if one story or one novel posits a new
kind of technological innovation or a... Then that innovation will show up in
following stories. Yeah. He would have to show the results of it sometime in the
future. Say a new space drive or a new social structure. He would have to follow
that through with the implications of it, the results of it in the future. This
tends to be something that is enjoyable for the reader as well because he can go
back and relate to developments, inventions, or social orders that he knows
about from previous stories and has a sense of involvement that way that is
unique to future histories. I think there have been many authors who have
attempted a future history, maybe not consciously, but any time an author, I
think, writes more than one book with a certain character or follows through on
a concept or idea, he's got the beginnings of a future history. Isaac Asimov, I
think, in his Foundation series had the makings of a future history. Of course,
that's a trilogy, the three books in the series. But he did follow through with
concepts. It goes over hundreds of years in its time span. So that would have to
qualify as a future series, but it's not as extensive, I think, as other
authors. That's true. Ursula K. Le Guin has done the same thing in her writing
where she has communications equipment which is common in all the novels and her
methods of space travel are common between all of her novels. I don't think she
has many connections. She just mentions things. But if I recall, she doesn't
actually follow through with integral relationships between her books. Not
specifically, no. And tonight, I think we will be concentrating mostly on the
works of three authors who seem to have created series that are more
comprehensive or longer, who
have created series that are seemingly more comprehensive than some of the
others, perhaps. Perhaps the authors are Robert Heinlein in his Future History,
The Past Through Tomorrow, Poul Anderson's Future History series, and also the
works of Larry Niven.
The original, the first, and probably one of the most influential of all writers
who've done a future history was not technically a science fiction author as
such. He was a British philosopher named Olaf Stapledon. He died in 1950. His
works are not really true novels. They're philosophical meditations on the
future of man. But his influence has been tremendous. His best-known work is
entitled Last and First Men, published in 1930. And his future history takes in
about two billion years, from the present to about two billion years in the
future. It covers the rise and fall of civilizations. It goes through
evolutionary changes in man. I think he goes through 17 changes of first men,
second men, third men, and so forth. His last race of men are called the 18th
men. And at the end of Last and First Men, they're at the edge of extinction.
The human race is almost extinct. They're on Neptune. It's kind of interesting
that in two billion years, they've only gotten to Neptune. But at the end of
that book, they're spraying artificial human spores into space with the hope
that solar radiation will carry them to other parts of the galaxy. But he made
charts, huge charts, and was mostly interested in his philosophy, where man was
going, what man was like, defining the species as a whole, and so forth. And his
influence was very great on pure science fiction writers.
In Robert Heinlein's future history, many of the activities take place on the
Earth and then move out into our solar system, and not really beyond until much
later in his series. One of his first books, our short stories, was The Roads
Must Roll. This story presents us with a rather unique invention, I think, a new
type of transportation system that's, as far as I know, not been used in other
stories. It's a series of conveyor belts, if you will, extremely large,
expansive conveyor belts that run at varying speeds right next to one another so
that a person could step onto the first level at, say, five miles per hour and
keep advancing to the next belt over until he's traveling 90 or 100 miles an
hour. These things stretch over what we would consider our highway system now.
They go all across the country, and I assume the world. And the story is a
commentary on the way the system works and the way it's become so expansive that
it is no longer efficient. And the way that the people are reacting to this
fact, the strikers try to destroy the system, and the men who are in charge of
it, of course, try to protect it. Even though there's a strike and even though
the roads aren't operating as efficiently as they should, I think it's a good
example of extrapolation, science fiction extrapolation. This was written in the
early 40s. And I think it's a pretty good guess by Heinlein, or pretty good look
into the future, seeing the gasoline crisis, perhaps, seeing the proliferation
of cars, the difficulty of transportation. Back in those days, it would seem to
me fairly logical that someone could foresee mechanized roads. And in that
sense, you know, thinking of the future, projecting or extrapolating what might
come about, he was wrong. But on the other hand, back then, that was a pretty
good guess, I would say. Another early story in his future history series, the
earliest of all, published in 1941, was called Lifeline.
And it's sort of a gimmick story. An inventor named Pinero, Dr. Pinero, who
turns up very briefly in some other works, has invented a machine that can tell
exactly when a person will die. Of course, the insurance companies don't
appreciate this. And after a long series of hassles and chases and arguments,
they succeed in having him assassinated, which was no surprise to him because he
predicted his own death down to the minute, too. But very soon, Heinlein got
into the, I think he was encouraged by his editor in this future history series.
John W. Campbell, Heinlein's editor, after printing a few of Heinlein's books,
discovered his future history charts and published those and encouraged Heinlein
to fell out those charts with stories that Campbell would publish later on in
Astounding Science Fiction and other magazines. After Heinlein wrote "The Roads
Must Roll", he wrote "Blowups Happen", which is concerned with atomic energy
and its generation on the Earth. His next series of books dealt with getting man
to the moon and what man did on the moon. I think the majority of his future
history dealt with moon exploration and the beginnings of the exploration of the
solar system. The Man Who Sold the Moon is one of his better known works and I
think one of the most fascinating of his novels. And basically, Heinlein thought
that moon exploration or outer space exploration would be financed by private
industry. Now, he was wrong there. The book concerns the exploits of one man, a
man named Harriman, D.D. Harriman. He has an obsession to go to the moon to
explore the solar system. He happens to be a billionaire, of course, so he can
indulge his obsession. And he does everything he can to sell the moon.
From having the spaceship built by his companies to publicizing it, to
advertising it, to getting the people worked up for it. There is some humor in
the work. There's some satire. I remember, for instance, in trying to get
backing or advertising for the moon, money, get the people behind it. And he
talked one soft drink company, whose product was named Moak, into projecting, or
at least he thought they could project the symbol of their product on the moon
from the earth. In other words, people would look at the moon and see the symbol
of the soft drink. And in doing this, of course, he was trying to sell the moon
to get the people behind it. The end of the work, he succeeded. Through all
sorts of chicanery, through exploitation,
through pushing, through the force of his personality, he's got people on the
moon. And he's been successful, although he himself can never go. Because by
this time, he's an old man. Or at least at this point in time, Heinlein leads you
to believe that he won't ever go. He did try later, I think, didn't he? In a
book, or excuse me, a short story called "Requiem". Right. Harriman finally does
reach the moon, and he dies while he's embarking from the spaceship on the moon.
And he finally reaches the moon's surface, but he dies there. And we get the
idea that he knew he was going to die, but to him it was worth it. In fact, he
had to, as rich as he was, as famous as he was, he had to do it secretly. He had
to bribe two pilots to take him. He had to get the spaceship set up secretly.
And I'm sure he knew it was going to be his last flight, but this is what he
wanted. And he succeeded. In a collection of short stories called The Green
Hills of Earth, Highland explores many aspects of the colonization of our solar
system. He does that in many ways. He covers questions such as women's
liberation with "Delilah and the Space Rigger", the first woman to work on a space
station. Of course, she has trouble at first, but the men finally accept her.
Another story, the title story, The Green Hills of Earth, concerned a blind bard
or a singer-poet of the spaceways. He is blind. The men take him on their ship
simply because he used to be a spaceman and has saved, in fact, saved a whole
ship full of people. But now he's a poet, a singer, even though he's blind. And
it's more of a human interest story, which Heinlein does emphasize a great deal
in his future history. The point at which he left colonization of the solar
system and exploration of the moon, I think, was in one of his better-known
novels entitled Methuselah's Children. The way he did it is interesting. There
was a family or a group of people who, through mutation alone, became almost
immortal. Their lifespans were at least three or four times out of normal
humans, and some of them even longer. And one of his family was entitled, his
name was Lazarus Long, who turns up in a lot of Heinlein stories, one of his
more famous characters. But Heinlein does this very well in showing the reaction
of, the family has to hide their secret, the fact that they're almost immortal.
But the reaction of society is sharp when they find out the existence of these
people. They think that the family is keeping a secret of longevity from them,
which they're not. So the family's in great danger. And they finally commandeer
or hijack an experimental interstellar craft. It's going to be the first one to
leave the solar system. They hijack it. They take off for the stars. And after
many adventures and meeting a couple of alien races, they do come back to Earth.
And in the meantime, the rest of humanity, because of the time difference, has
discovered ways of increasing their own lifespans. So the problem there has been
taken care of. Heinlein did continue with this in one of his last works, 1973,
The Time Enough for Love. He has a character of Lazarus Long again in that work.
But it's very loosely connected to the rest of his story. The connection is not
very sharp.
Poul Anderson's future history is quite a bit more expansive than Heinlein's.
Heinlein's covered about 625 years. Anderson's covers a few thousand years. His
starts in the 21st century. And after the human beings have discovered a way of
traveling faster than light, they have an interstellar drive. And human society
breaks up into, oh, many, many different colonies throughout the galaxy,
different planets, different areas, with very little communication between them,
sort of a far-flung breakup is what it's called. And this portion of his future
history is called the Polesotechnic League. And probably the dominating
character of that, the stories involving the League, is Nicholas van Rijn. One of
the main elements that Poul Anderson has foreseen here is that the Polesotechnic
League and all of humanity as it stretches out through the stars would be a
trading empire, more like a frontier. Vaguely reminiscent of the East India
Company and whatnot that went on around the 17th and 18th century. Right.
And he introduces characters who are taking advantage of this aspect,
principally Nicholas Van Rijn. This character is introduced to us in the first
novel of the Polesotechnic League or his future history series called Trader to
the Stars. In the first story of Trader to the Stars, Hiding Place, we're
introduced to Nicholas who is on board a yacht and he and his crew are trying to
escape from some human enemies. The yacht is defective and they know that they
can't get away from these humans so they drop out of their hyperdrive, which is
shuttling them along higher than the speed of light, into normal space and
search for an alien ship which they believe they might be lucky enough to find
circling a particular star. They don't know anything about these aliens and all
they want is just a ship that they can get a hold of to go on to their base.
When they do drop out of light speed they find a ship and they try to board it
and when they get there and force their way on board the aliens have disappeared
and they've taken everything out of their control room that might indicate what
size or shape they are. When they look into the hold of the ship they find what
is essentially an interstellar zoo. It's apparently a ship that the aliens have
been using to transport alien creatures to different places in their solar
system and they have apparently taken one of the empty cages themselves and have
hidden there so that the humans don't know which ones they are. The entire thing
centers around Nicholas trying to outsmart the aliens and find out who they are
in time for them to get the ship working and get out of there before the human
enemies catch up with them. It's a typical Van Rijn story because everyone else
by the end of the story has given up hope of ever getting away and only Nicholas
is calm enough and cool enough in his own mind to make it work. And clever
enough too. I think a man like Nicholas has to, well he operates on his wits.
He's not the heroic type. He does things because of his quick wittedness, his
cleverness. And I think there's a certain logic to his motivation too. When you
think of it, the trading empire, the profit motive that Nicholas Van Rijn is
involved with, with such a huge number of colonies with worlds scattered over
the entire galaxy, it's not practical for any one world to try to dominate to a
form of government. This polysotechnic league was really not a government. It
was more of a trading empire. Another similar story to this is the War of the
Wingmen, which was reissued, I think, under the name The Man Who Counts. Again,
it's a Nicholas Van Rijn story. He changes all the rules because in the end he's
the one that gets the rewards, the girl, and arranges the escape from their
marooned situation on this alien planet. The planet itself gives Anderson an
excuse to exercise his talents at world building. The planet is set 90 degrees
off center on its axis, thus giving it extreme changes in seasons from year to
year. The planet is twice the diameter of the earth and five times its mass, but
the densest material it's made up of is calcium and lighter materials, thus
giving it a gravity only slightly greater than the earth. The atmosphere is much
deeper and thicker than on the earth and is able to support a humanoid flying
mammal. These creatures are the intelligent life of the planet and are the focus
of the manipulations of Nicholas Van Rijn. His sole object is to get himself and
his party off the planet in one piece, and he really doesn't care how far he has
to go, lying, stealing, cheating, whatever, to get that end accomplished. And he
manages to go through quite a few different manipulations in this process, but
showing his characteristic crabbiness and his characteristic cleverness at the
same time, he manages to make this come off. As you pointed out earlier, at the
end of the book, the whole space opera motif has been changed, and Nicholas Van
Ryn, who is very unheroic, has succeeded in saving his companions, one of whom
is a beautiful woman, and really performing actions which you would only expect
a great hero to be able to perform. But Van Rijn does it simply with his
cleverness, his apparent selfishness, but really his actions seem to benefit
everybody. The net effect is one of both humor and great enjoyment. There was
one other major division in Anderson's future history. The Polesotechnic League
lasted for millennia, but it did fall finally. And after a period called the
Time of Troubles, the Terran Empire took over most of the galaxy. And probably
his, well, a character as well known as Nicholas Van Rijn takes up most of these
stories, Dominic Flandry. With Flandry, Anderson has the opportunity to grow up
with a character. We see him, first of all, when he's a young, innocent space
cadet just entering the service of the Terran Empire. We see him grow. We see
him become an agent, a diplomat, a very important force in this Terran Empire.
He is different than Van Rijn. He's sophisticated. He's smooth. He does operate
by his wits, but he's more of a hero type in that he can fight. He can perform
heroic actions. But he does it with sort of a, oh, a James Bond-ish cynicism or
a James Bond-ish kind of flair or panache about him. But I think there are a
number of novels and stories about Dominic Flandry, you know, following his
whole lifespan until almost the fall of the Terran Empire, which would end most
of, well, which would end Anderson's future history series. There are, there's
one story, I believe, which goes beyond the Terran Empire, which suggests that
things are coming back together after its fall. But the Terrans, or the
Earthlings, did have one major enemy, the Merseians, in this section of
Anderson's future history. And Flandry's job for most of the stories and novels
built around him was to combat the Merseian threat.
The third author we're considering under the future history framework is Larry
Niven. Niven is probably one of the most popular of the present-day science
fiction writers. He's young, he's bright, he loves to write, very personable,
and he's constructed a tightly connected future history series and attracted a
great many fans in doing so. Many of these fans are quite involved in the works
themselves. They've worked out elaborate charts and timelines and have written
Niven and given him all sorts of feedback on the works that he's written. In
fact, this has become rather complex and can be a problem, I guess, to some
future history writers in that you better have everything just right or some
reader's going to pick out an error and show it to you. Some of the errors that,
for instance, that were involved in the novel Ringworld that was so popular
about ten years ago were mentioned to him by fans and he worked them out in the
sequel and explained them away, which must have been quite a challenge for him
to do. In fact, if I recall, he had said in one of his volumes that he wasn't
going to write any more in his future history. I forget which volume he said
that in, but later he did write Ringworld Engineers and I suspect it was because
of his fans, the pressure on him to continue with the timeline that he'd
started. Yes, he said that he had no intention of completing that story but went
on ahead because of the reaction to the story. It was so popular. Niven's future
history starts off in our present and works its way forward to the year 3100,
starting off with the beginnings of an organ bank where people in the beginning,
when they die, leave organs to be implanted in other people and that later grows
into a system where people many times unwillingly end up donating organs to this
organ bank. And it also has the first man explorations of our solar system. He
also brings in the dolphins and the whales, I believe, as an intelligent race
and gives equal rights to those creatures. The organ bank thing becomes rather
more expansive within the next 100 years or so. So as everyone wants to live as
long as they can, they begin to pass laws saying any minor infractions that you
might commit automatically entail the death penalty so that your body parts can
be used for other people. Early colonization of our surrounding star systems was
done by a ship called a Bussard Ramjet, which because of its extremely intense
magnetic field, no human occupant could travel in the ship. Therefore, they were
sent out as sort of robot probes. Later on, they developed a system which by
they could shield the ship and human occupants could go along with them. But he
made some very interesting stories surrounding these early colonization ships
where the robot controlled Bussard Ramjet would go out and scout out a planet
and land on it and say, this planet is suitable for human habitation. And then
would radio the slow boats which were following it at sublight speed to come to
this location and this would make a good place for a settlement. All the
colonists on board the slow boats were in suspended animation and did not know
exactly where they're heading. They depended upon the accuracy of the robot
probe, which made for some very interesting planets which ended up being
colonized by humankind. One of them was called Mount Lookitthat and it got
its name by the ram robot came down and landed in a particular area. It tested
all the gases and everything and found out this place was perfectly habitable
for human beings and radioed the slow boat. And they followed it to its location
and then the computer aboard the slow boat woke up the crew and they went down
to land on the surface of the planet and they were aghast to find out that the
surface was made of pure methane, totally uninhabitable, and they were flying
along the rim of the atmosphere and finally they see this plateau reaching 40
miles straight up from the surface of the planet being about the size of
California. And when the pilot sees it he goes, well dang, look at that. There
go the name of the planet. I think one of his novels dealt with the society on
that planet, A Gift from Earth I believe. True. That was A Gift from Earth is
the end of the organ banks per se because in developments in A Gift from Earth
they learned to clone various organs where if somebody needed a liver they would
simply clone and grow a liver. In introducing the novel Ringworld, one of his
most popular books, we need to go back to about the year 2500 when humanity
meets another alien race known as the Pierson's puppeteers. This is a very
strange race who are very technical and very advanced but seemingly socially
different from us in that they are extremely cowardly. All of their activities
are regulated by this cowardice. They want to protect themselves to the point
where they'll do anything, including build a high technological society to do
so. This novel won both Hugo and Nebula awards for Larry Niven. The Ringworld is
an extrapolation on a Dyson Sphere which is a, if you can imagine a hollow
sphere built around the sun and then set spinning so that you can have gravity
on the inside. The Ringworld is simply a ring built around the sun with
mountains on the edge of the ring at least a thousand miles high in order to
keep the atmosphere inside it. Set the ring rotating in order to create gravity
on the inside and there you've got a habitat with approximately three trillion
times the surface area of the earth.
I think there would be a major theme to all three of these authors that we've
covered on the show and their future history concept. First of all, any author
who constructs a future history I think is optimistic about man's future. You
know, man has a future, therefore he's going to write about it. And I see in all
of them the expansion of man, the idea that man is going to be unstoppable, he
will progress, he'll fall many times, but he will still keep going. So overall I
would say that each author treats the rise and fall of human civilization in the
future, you know, the high points and the low points, but man still keeps going.
I think that's very strong in Heinlein and also in Anderson and Niven.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.